From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> At the front lines of the Ebola crisis
in Central Africa,
>> [music]
>> badly equipped health workers with
little outside support are losing the
[music] fight against one of the worst
outbreaks in history.
Today, my [music] colleague Declan Walsh
takes us to the epicenter of the virus
to understand [music] why so far its
spread has been nearly impossible to
stop.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, [music] June 3rd.
Declan, thank you so much for doing
this. Where are you right now?
>> I'm in Bunia, a city in the northeast of
the Democratic Republic of Congo.
>> Okay. So, you've been in the DRC for
about a week and a half covering this
horrific Ebola outbreak. So, just tell
us what you're seeing. What it's been
like on the ground.
>> It's a really dire situation here right
now. This outbreak was only detected
just over 2 weeks ago, but the virus was
probably spreading for two, some groups
are saying even three months before it
was detected. And so, we just don't know
how deep, how wide it has gotten into
the population in these areas. And
that's really hampered efforts not just
to treat the people affected by the
disease, but to contain its spread.
>> And in terms of numbers, cases, deaths,
where do things stand?
>> So far, about 250 people are confirmed
to have died. There are about another
1,100
suspected cases, but the true spread and
extent of this virus is thought to be
much, much wider than that. And I don't
think it's an exaggeration to say that
the virus is way ahead of the response
at this point. Already, this is the
third largest Ebola outbreak on record,
and there are groups saying that it has
the potential to become the largest
ever. Now, that's a very high bar. The
largest Ebola outbreak was between 2014
and 2016 in West Africa. That killed
11,000 people.
>> Right.
>> We're far off those numbers, but the
fact that the response is so far behind
the curve makes it obviously much, much
harder to start to push it back.
>> So, what do we know about how this
started and how it went undetected for
so long?
>> Because of that huge delay, there's so
much we still don't know, but one thing
that seems to be almost certain is that
this outbreak started in this gold
mining town called Mongbwalu. That's
about 50 miles north of Bunia, of the
regional capital.
And so, a couple of days after I got
here with our photographer, Arlette
Bashizi, we got in a car and we drove to
Mongbwalu to find not just the town
where it started, but also what the
response looked like in this place
where, as far as we had heard, there was
the greatest number of infections.
>> And what did you find?
>> Well, first, the road to get there was
quite difficult. It was really a road
just in name. It was made of mud. It was
extremely rough and bumpy, [snorts]
but all along that road, we passed these
Congolese military checkpoints, and that
was because we were passing through
territory where at least three or four
different militias were known to
operate. So, that was complicating the
response and also preventing aid workers
from getting to this town.
>> Mhm.
>> And when we got to Mongbwalu itself, we
went straight to the public hospital,
which we knew was the center of
treatment efforts.
We were expecting really to see the
architecture of an Ebola response that
you classically think of.
>> Mhm.
>> For some of us it's maybe a Hollywood
reference like movies like Outbreak and
so on, these large white tents, lots of
people walking around in sealed suits.
>> Right.
>> But there was almost nothing.
And we went into the actual Ebola wards
themselves.
We put on the full protective equipment.
We spoke to the staff. We found a doctor
who wanted to take us inside.
And there, honestly, it was pretty
shocking.
Apart from the doctor who brought me in,
the ward was just full of people who had
come to help the Ebola patients.
Usually who had come to bring food or
water because those things aren't
provided by the hospital, but they were
wearing almost no protective equipment.
>> Mhm.
>> And at the end of the room in the corner
we found this young boy, 5-year-old boy
called Emmanuel, who was lying on this
bare mattress on his own hooked up to a
very simple drip.
And his dad was standing over him
looking so concerned. And
we got speaking in French.
He told me that his son had been going
to school just a few days earlier when
the teacher sent him home. Apparently he
had a headache and a fever.
The family tried to look after him for
the first few days, but he got worse.
And then he said that the night before
Emmanuel started to bleed uncontrollably
out of his nose. And so they rushed him
to this hospital. And when he was lying
there,
>> [music]
>> he had this tissue stuffed up his nose
to try and staunch that bleeding.
And what was even more striking was that
just [music] a couple of yards away, two
beds down,
there was lying the body of a
21-year-old woman called Christine
Barati, who had died just hours earlier.
The doctor said that she had been doing
fine in the evening, and then suddenly
at about 2:00 in the morning, she fell
into a coma.
And died very quickly. He said they were
unable to revive her.
Her shoes were still under the bed where
she had left them. Her belongings were
in a bag.
But what was so disturbing about that
is that the body of a person who has
just died of Ebola is extremely
contagious. And yet the remains of this
poor woman were just covered by this tin
sheet, and people were walking in and
out of this ward with very little
protection, including, it has to be
said, the dad of this boy.
>> Mhm.
>> This just seemed to go against every
precaution that you could take against
Ebola.
>> And did you get a sense of why this was
happening? Did you talk to the doctors?
What was going on? I'm sure they didn't
want that to be happening either.
>> No, the doctors were very well aware of
the risks.
>> What they said, "Look, what can we do?
This is the space we've got available to
us. These are the resources that we
have. We only have a certain amount of
protective equipment. We can't give it
to all of our staff cuz simply we don't
have it." And frankly, they also said,
"We're not really trained for this. We
didn't receive any special training for
this. We were suddenly hit with this
declaration of an outbreak and we are
making do as best as we can." But, you
know, this young doctor who was
bringing me around
he was angry at his own government
because it took the authorities so long
to discover this outbreak, two possibly
three months after it started.
And he was also angry, more broadly, at
the international system of Ebola
response, that architecture of experts
and aid groups and so on, because so few
of them had reached this town where it
started and where the greatest number of
cases were.
Even though he was wearing the
protective gear, I could see in his eyes
and hear in his voice his intense
frustration. And as we were looking at
this scene, at one point, he turned
round to me and he said, "We are 12 days
into this outbreak. Is this the best we
can do?" [music]
>> Well, okay. To this doctor's question,
Declan, why has the response been so
slow? What have you come to understand
about that?
>> Part of the reason is to do with the
virus itself, or rather with this strain
of the virus. Ebola is this highly
contagious hemorrhagic disease, which is
spread not like COVID-19 through
respiratory means, but it's spread
through touch, usually by touching
bodily fluids of a person who is
infected. Now, this particular strain of
the disease is called Bundibugyo. It's
named after, in fact, a town in western
Uganda, about 60 mi from here across the
border, where it first occurred in 2007.
And like all the viruses that cause
Ebola, it's thought to reside in the
fruit bat population. And it just
happens that there is a large fruit bat
population that roosts in the trees in
this region. But it is an incredibly
rare strain of the virus. This is only
the third Bundibugyo outbreak ever. What
that means is that as yet there is not a
vaccine or a cure for this disease.
On top of that, when Ebola spreads into
a population, it often presents in
people initially with symptoms that are
very similar to malaria or typhoid. Now,
they happen to be extremely common
diseases in this area. And in a town
like Mongbwalu, people are very used to
getting these diseases. And when they
do, they typically don't go to the
hospital. In fact, sometimes they don't
even go and see a doctor. Many poor
people, they tend to go to traditional
healers, or they'll go to some local
small clinic.
All of that combined means that people
in Mongbwalu were really only going to
the hospital for medical help when they
were approaching the last stages of the
disease.
>> So, people are delaying treatment
basically because it seems like they may
think that they have one of these more
common illnesses. They just don't know
how serious it actually is.
>> That's right. And then the other issue
the doctors brought up was with testing.
Because it's this very rare strain,
initially there wasn't even a test in
this entire region for Bundibugyo. When
they first detected what they saw as
this mysterious wave of deaths in this
town that happened all through the month
of April and then into early May, they
sent samples off to the regional lab to
get it tested and it came back negative
for Ebola because they were testing for
an entirely different strain, more
common strain which is called a Zaire.
And that it was only eventually when
health officials sent a sample to the
capital Kinshasa that they tested it for
this rare Bundibugyo strain and then
that came back positive and they
identified the disease. So, since the
outbreak has started, there's been this
chronic shortage of testing kits to
identify who's got Bundibugyo. And that
just makes treatment at the hospital
really hard because the doctors told us
that they would send off a test and not
get a result for four, five, six days.
Often times, they said, by the time the
test result came back, the patient was
already dead.
>> So, all the elements are in place for
this disease to fester in this place
that, as you said, is very remote, far
from a major city, difficult to get to.
>> Yes, and you'd think that that isolation
would prevent the spread of the disease,
but in fact, there are several factors
that, in some respects, made this town
an ideal place not just for the disease
to take off, but also to spread across
the region. So, it's this gold mining
town that has a huge population of
migrant laborers. And because mining has
money, it brings traders, it brings gold
smugglers, it brings sex workers, and
these are all people who move in and out
of the town as well.
>> Mhm.
>> That also, incidentally, has possibly
been a factor that provided vectors for
the disease to spread elsewhere.
>> I want to ask, we've been hearing a lot
about the Trump administration pulling
back on foreign aid. How much of an
impact did that have in the spread of
Ebola in this case?
>> Well, if you speak to people in the aid
community, for them, there's no doubt
that if USAID and American aid more
generally were still in place, that this
virus would have been detected sooner
than it was. The other point that aid
workers brought up is that the US was
providing a lot of funding for general
humanitarian aid in the Congo, and some
of that money went to funding small
Congolese groups, and they weren't all
necessarily working in health. They
might have been just community
organizations.
But the fact of their existence provided
a network that could be activated at
short notice in response to a crisis.
And now, that network really just wasn't
available when it was needed this time.
>> And did things change once this was
declared an outbreak? Once it became
clear just how fast Ebola was spreading?
Like, did the US or other international
aid groups step up?
>> Yes, I mean, the aid machine has started
up, and the experts are coming into this
area. Aid is starting to arrive.
But then it turns out that there is
another obstacle to pushing back this
outbreak. And that's the fact that many
of the people in some of the
worst-affected communities have a deep
mistrust for the people [music] who are
trying to save them.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Okay, explain what you just said that
people have this distrust of aid groups
of the people trying to contain this
virus.
What's going on there?
>> Look, a huge obstacle to fighting this
outbreak has been the fact that a lot of
people in these communities are still in
denial about the virus. Either they
don't accept that it exists at all or
they see it as somehow a curse or they
see it as a conspiracy theory. When we
were there, we heard so many stories
about how people saw this disease as
some sort of conspiracy between doctors
in the local hospital and these foreign
aid groups who they thought were
bringing this disease to the community.
In fact, it was a story that we heard
that Doctors Without Borders which had
Jeeps that have extremely high antennas
sticking out of the roof that Doctors
Without Borders were using those
antennas to somehow spread the disease
among the community. Now,
there is, strangely enough I think, a
sort of logical explanation for this.
>> Mhm.
>> And that goes like this. This community
had been grappling with this wave of
mysterious deaths until this outbreak
was finally detected and declared.
And so, by the time we had an
explanation for it which was Ebola,
there were already hundreds of cases.
So, this community is faced with this
tidal wave of infections and deaths and
people are searching for an explanation.
They're going to the hospital too late
to get treatment. By the time they get
there, many of them are dying. And so,
people in a certain way logically are
starting to associate the hospital
as a place where people go not to have
their lives saved, but to die.
>> Right.
>> And so I think that really is partly at
the root of some of these wild
conspiracy theories that were going
around. But what that meant in practice
for the medical staff at the hospital
is that they not only were grappling
with this incredibly dangerous disease
and chronically under-equipped to fight
it, but they were also dealing with this
intense hostility from the community.
>> And what did that hostility actually
look like? How did it play out? How did
you see it?
>> So when we got to Mbandaka, the huge
issue was how to deal with a body of
this popular pastor who had just died
the night before. His name was Sylvestre
Atoma. He was this charismatic Catholic
preacher in the town who had a pretty
big following.
And when we arrived at the hospital, the
director told us that his followers had
gathered at the gate of the hospital,
and they were demanding to get his body
so that they could bury it in the
traditional Congolese fashion. Now, the
hospital director refused because he
said that would have been a disaster for
the spread of the disease in the town.
>> Why?
>> Because traditional burial practices in
the Congo involve large numbers of
mourners touching the body of a deceased
person. And so a funeral can become a
super-spreader event, and that in fact
has been a problem in previous
outbreaks.
>> Okay, makes sense.
>> But the refusal to give up this body by
the director enraged his supporters
>> [music]
>> who didn't believe his explanations
about why this was an incredibly unsafe
thing to do.
And so the day before they had stormed
into [music] the hospital compound, and
the director told me he had been chased
through the compound with people
throwing rocks at him.
And in fact, parked outside his office,
I could see his vehicle which had a hole
in one of the windows where he said
people threw rocks that didn't hit him,
but they hit his car.
>> They're literally attacking the hospital
director.
>> They are literally attacking him in
order to get this body. [music] They
refused.
And then, said that the security forces
were called to try and bring peace.
Then we turn up the next day. Then that
evening, we went back to our hotel in
the town, and just as we were settling
in after dark,
we hear these gunshots going off.
>> [music]
>> And it turns out that a crowd of over
100 young men, again supporters of this
cleric, had converged on the hospital
yet again in an effort to spring out
this body.
>> My god.
>> The police and the soldiers were firing
their weapons in the air to try and
disperse [music] them. Then this crowd
of people went around the back of the
hospital, tried to attack it from
another side, and this running battle
went on for 5 hours all through the
evening
>> until 11:00 at night [music]
when the police finally got the
situation under control.
>> [music]
>> And then, the next morning, after
careful negotiation with the church
authorities, the body was escorted
[music]
by a line of soldiers from the hospital
down to the local cemetery where it was
safely buried.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so this sounds like a particularly
extreme incident.
How common is this reaction to the
hospital workers, to the aid workers, to
the people who are directly working on
the front lines of the virus.
>> Well, I would say this incident was
exceptional because it involved this
very prominent local figure who [snorts]
had a huge following. But the dynamic,
unfortunately, is very common because
across the city Red Cross workers who
were trying to carry out these what they
call safe burials of these bodies. In
other words, instead of allowing a lot
of people to come and touch the body,
the body would typically be disinfected.
It will be placed in a sealed bag and
these workers will ensure that while
there is a dignified burial, it's not
going to turn into an event where many
other people become infected. So, the
teams of Red Cross workers trying to
carry out these burials often run into
the same kind of resistance. They've
been threatened. They've been attacked.
>> Wow.
>> Because people
effectively don't believe the virus
exists or else they don't believe that
it poses a threat to them or frankly, I
think they just feel overwhelmed by the
scale of the calamity that has befallen
their community. And so they take it out
again on the people who are trying to
ensure that this disease doesn't spread
even further.
>> And do you have an understanding from
your conversations with health officials
of just how big of an obstacle this is
in the effort to get the outbreak under
control? Like how much is it actually
stymieing the response, do you think?
>> It's huge. When you talk to health
officials or aid workers and say, "What
do you need to push this back?" The
first thing, of course, they say is we
need equipment. We need protective
equipment. We need medicine. We need
funds. The second thing they say is we
need education. We need an immediate
urgent effort to communicate to people
about the nature of the danger that they
face.
>> We have some experience with this kind
of thing from COVID. Even in the United
States, there were a lot of conspiracy
theories. There was a lot of mistrust of
the medical establishment, of hospitals.
It strikes me that this is a harder
thing to solve than even perhaps getting
the resources to where they need to be.
I mean, building trust is not an easy or
a quick thing.
>> It's very challenging.
But there is precedent. I mean,
in previous outbreaks in West Africa in
2014-2015,
in the second largest outbreak, which
was also in Congo, health workers ran
into similar problems. And so, there are
tools, there are techniques, there are
ideas for combating this problem, but it
really does take a concerted, intensive
effort. While we were in Mongbwalu, I
went to see the local parish priest, the
Catholic priest, because this preacher
who had just died was a Catholic. And I
said, "What what are you doing to try
and address this problem?" And he said,
"At mass last Sunday, in my sermon, I
appealed to people to carry out safe
burials, to adhere to the correct
practices." But he said, "Until now,
people are not listening." He said it's
going to take a much bigger and more
intensive effort to try and convince
these communities about what they need
to change in their own lives in order to
keep themselves safe.
>> Declan, what do we know about how far
it's spread outside of the DRC at this
point?
>> There has been one death in neighboring
Uganda, and I believe about eight or
nine suspected cases at the moment.
There are great fears that it is also
spreading into South Sudan. But for now,
this virus has, for the large part,
remained confined in Ituri province, and
there have been some cases in two other
Congolese provinces as well. But again,
I got to stress that we just don't know
enough about the extent of this virus
just yet. And that brings us to another
key part of the effort to fight the
virus that they haven't frankly even
started on in earnest yet, which is
called contact tracing.
>> Right. Contact tracing meaning trying to
understand where everybody who is
infected has been, who they may have
seen, touched, been in contact with.
>> That's right. The problem is that
because this is such a rare strain and
because there are such limited testing
facilities, they've barely started the
work of tracing those contacts yet. And
all the experts in this field say that
until you trace the contacts, you cannot
cut the chain of transmission and you
can't really expect to contain the
spread of the disease.
>> Okay. Obviously, there is a lot of
uncertainty here. There are a lot of
unpredictable factors at play. But from
your reporting, Declan, what is your
understanding of the best-case and the
worst-case scenario for containing the
spread right now?
>> Well, the worst-case scenario is that
this outbreak goes on for several years
and that the numbers soar. Not just the
numbers of people affected, but that the
death toll rises possibly to the level
that we saw back in West Africa in
2014-2015.
But you know, it doesn't have to be that
way. There is an outcome here where the
scale of international assistance rises
to meet the challenge of this outbreak.
So, I think it's still an open question
about which way we're going to go
because don't forget we are very early
into this outbreak. That's kind of in a
way what's so worrisome about it. It's
only been 2 weeks since it was
officially declared and I've been
speaking to people on the ground here
and they say it already feels like
they've been at this for months because
it's been such an intense start. Most
Ebola outbreaks start with a handful of
cases and then it spreads. The challenge
with this one is that from day one there
were hundreds of suspected cases and
many deaths and those numbers are just
going up and up at the moment.
>> [snorts]
>> Declan,
I can't stop thinking about Emmanuel,
the 5-year-old boy who you met in the
clinic with his dad.
Do you know how he's doing?
>> I do. I've been in touch with his dad.
He's been sending me messages every day
and
a couple of days ago he sent me a
message and he said that his son had
been sitting up,
had been
drawing numbers because he'd just been
learning to count and that he was asking
for his toys.
>> Amazing.
>> And then today he said that Emmanuel's
been discharged and he's gone home.
>> [music]
>> Wow. So,
>> [snorts]
>> one moment of hope at least in all this.
Declan, thank you so much. We really
appreciate your time.
>> Thank you, Natalie.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
>> Look, [music] we're not moving forward
with the fund, period.
>> The Trump administration is abandoning
plans to create a $1.8 billion fund for
people who said they were victims of
[music] unfair government prosecution,
including January 6th rioters.
The fund had drawn fierce opposition
from the courts and Congress, including
congressional Republicans. [music]
During testimony before a House
committee on Tuesday, acting [music]
Attorney General Todd Blanche, who just
days ago advocated for the fund, told
lawmakers that it was now [music] dead.
>> Not moving forward ever?
>> Correct.
>> Oh, there's no more fund then?
>> Well, to the extent [music] there was a
fund, remember the fund wasn't set up
yet. There was a
>> And President Trump signed an executive
order on Tuesday asking tech companies
to give the government oversight of new
AI models before [music] releasing them.
Under the order, tech companies would
give the government 30 days to review
their models before making them
available to the public. And the
Treasury Secretary [music] would study
security vulnerabilities discovered by
the models. This is the administration's
[music] biggest step toward regulating
AI, and it marked a change in approach
for Trump, who had previously promoted a
hands-off [music] stance toward the
technology.
Today's episode was produced by Claire
Tensegetter, [music]
Stella Tan, and Chris Benderev with help
from Adrian Hurst. It was edited [music]
by Chris Hacksaw with help from Mark
George and contains music by Leah Shaw
[music] Dameron, Rowan Nemi Sto, Pat
McCusker, and Sophia Landman. This
episode was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
Special [music] thanks to Brad Kimbrell.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
[music] Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.